USER_GUIDE.md, before:

# User Guide

This guide provides a comprehensive walkthrough of the Smart Attendance System, designed for non-technical users. It covers everything from logging in to interpreting attendance reports.

## 1. Core Concepts

- **Face Recognition:** The system uses a webcam to identify employees by their unique facial features. Each face is converted into a secure digital signature (an "embedding"). When an employee clocks in or out, the system compares the new embedding to the stored ones to find a match.
- **Attendance Record:** A timestamped entry that confirms when an employee has checked in or out.
- **Dashboard:** The main screen after logging in, providing access to all features. Admins and employees see different dashboards tailored to their roles.

## 2. Step-by-Step Instructions

### Logging In

1.  Navigate to the system's home page.
2.  Click on the **Dashboard Login** button.
3.  Enter your username and password.
4.  Click **Login**.

### For Employees

#### Marking Attendance

1.  From the home page, click **Mark Time-In** to clock in for the day.
2.  Position your face in front of the webcam. The system will automatically recognize you and record your check-in time.
3.  At the end of the day, click **Mark Time-Out** to clock out.

#### Viewing Your Attendance

1.  Log in to your dashboard.
2.  Select a date range to view your attendance history.
3.  The system will display a table with your check-in and check-out times, as well as the total hours worked for each day.

### For Admins

#### Registering a New Employee

1.  Log in to your admin dashboard.
2.  Click on **Register Employee**.
3.  Fill in the new employee's details and click **Register**.
    [NEW SCREENSHOT: Employee Registration Form]

#### Adding Employee Photos

1.  From the admin dashboard, click on **Add Photos**.
2.  Enter the username of the employee and click **Add Photos**.
3.  The system will automatically capture a set of images to create a face profile for the employee. Ensure the employee is in a well-lit area and facing the camera.

#### Viewing Attendance Reports

Admins have access to several attendance reports:

- **Attendance by Date:** View a list of all employees who were present on a specific date, along with their work hours.
- **Attendance by Employee:** View the complete attendance history for a single employee over a selected date range.

## 3. Interpreting the Results

The attendance reports provide the following information:

- **Time In:** The first recorded check-in time for the day.
- **Time Out:** The last recorded check-out time for the day.
- **Hours:** The total hours worked for the day.
- **Break Hours:** The total time spent on breaks.

The system also generates graphs to help you visualize attendance trends.

## 4. Troubleshooting

- **Recognition Issues:** If the system is having trouble recognizing an employee, ensure they are in a well-lit area and facing the camera directly. If the problem persists, an admin may need to recapture the employee's photos.
- **Incorrect Timestamps:** If you notice any incorrect timestamps in your attendance records, please contact an administrator to have them corrected.

## 5. Model Evaluation Reports

Administrators who need to verify recognition quality can generate a full evaluation report from the command line:

```bash
python manage.py eval --split-csv reports/splits.csv
```

The command reuses the live recognition engine to process the encrypted image dataset and stores its findings in `reports/evaluation/`:

- `metrics_summary.json` – accuracy, precision, recall, macro F1, False Acceptance Rate (FAR), and False Rejection Rate (FRR).
- `confusion_matrix.csv` / `.png` – shows which identities are confused most often and whether "Unknown" predictions occur frequently.
- `threshold_sweep.csv` / `.png` – plots how FAR, FRR, accuracy, and F1 change as you tighten or loosen the distance threshold.

Use these reports to fine-tune thresholds before rolling changes into production or to document the system's performance for compliance reviews.

Commit message:

Add motion-based liveness gate and documentation

USER_GUIDE.md, after:

# User Guide

This guide provides a comprehensive walkthrough of the Smart Attendance System, designed for non-technical users. It covers everything from logging in to interpreting attendance reports.

## 1. Core Concepts

- **Face Recognition:** The system uses a webcam to identify employees by their unique facial features. Each face is converted into a secure digital signature (an "embedding"). When an employee clocks in or out, the system compares the new embedding to the stored ones to find a match.
- **Attendance Record:** A timestamped entry that confirms when an employee has checked in or out.
- **Dashboard:** The main screen after logging in, providing access to all features. Admins and employees see different dashboards tailored to their roles.

## 2. Step-by-Step Instructions

### Logging In

1.  Navigate to the system's home page.
2.  Click on the **Dashboard Login** button.
3.  Enter your username and password.
4.  Click **Login**.

### For Employees

#### Marking Attendance

1.  From the home page, click **Mark Time-In** to clock in for the day.
2.  Position your face in front of the webcam. The system will automatically recognize you and record your check-in time.
3.  At the end of the day, click **Mark Time-Out** to clock out.
4.  If the banner "Liveness check failed. Please blink or move your head slightly and try again before marking attendance." appears, blink twice or gently move your head so the system can detect natural motion before retrying.

#### Viewing Your Attendance

1.  Log in to your dashboard.
2.  Select a date range to view your attendance history.
3.  The system will display a table with your check-in and check-out times, as well as the total hours worked for each day.

### For Admins

#### Registering a New Employee

1.  Log in to your admin dashboard.
2.  Click on **Register Employee**.
3.  Fill in the new employee's details and click **Register**.
    [NEW SCREENSHOT: Employee Registration Form]

#### Adding Employee Photos

1.  From the admin dashboard, click on **Add Photos**.
2.  Enter the username of the employee and click **Add Photos**.
3.  The system will automatically capture a set of images to create a face profile for the employee. Ensure the employee is in a well-lit area and facing the camera.

#### Viewing Attendance Reports

Admins have access to several attendance reports:

- **Attendance by Date:** View a list of all employees who were present on a specific date, along with their work hours.
- **Attendance by Employee:** View the complete attendance history for a single employee over a selected date range.

## 3. Interpreting the Results

The attendance reports provide the following information:

- **Time In:** The first recorded check-in time for the day.
- **Time Out:** The last recorded check-out time for the day.
- **Hours:** The total hours worked for the day.
- **Break Hours:** The total time spent on breaks.

The system also generates graphs to help you visualize attendance trends.

## 4. Troubleshooting

- **Recognition Issues:** If the system is having trouble recognizing an employee, ensure they are in a well-lit area and facing the camera directly. If the problem persists, an admin may need to recapture the employee's photos.
- **Liveness Prompts:** When the system rejects an attempt with the message above, keep your face within the guide box, blink, and tilt your head slightly until the status indicator turns green.
- **Incorrect Timestamps:** If you notice any incorrect timestamps in your attendance records, please contact an administrator to have them corrected.

## 5. Model Evaluation Reports

Administrators who need to verify recognition quality can generate a full evaluation report from the command line:

```bash
python manage.py eval --split-csv reports/splits.csv
```

The command reuses the live recognition engine to process the encrypted image dataset and stores its findings in `reports/evaluation/`:

- `metrics_summary.json` – accuracy, precision, recall, macro F1, False Acceptance Rate (FAR), and False Rejection Rate (FRR).
- `confusion_matrix.csv` / `.png` – shows which identities are confused most often and whether "Unknown" predictions occur frequently.
- `threshold_sweep.csv` / `.png` – plots how FAR, FRR, accuracy, and F1 change as you tighten or loosen the distance threshold.

Use these reports to fine-tune thresholds before rolling changes into production or to document the system's performance for compliance reviews.
