docs/troubleshooting.md, before:

# Operations Troubleshooting Guide

This guide provides actionable steps for diagnosing and resolving operational issues
encountered while running the Attendance Management System. It focuses on the
asynchronous attendance pipeline (Celery + Redis), the batch attendance API, and
fallback behaviours implemented in `recognition/views.py`.

## Celery or Redis Outage

### Symptoms
- Batch attendance submissions remain in a `PENDING` state or never complete.
- `enqueue_attendance_batch` API returns HTTP 503 with the message `"Unable to enqueue attendance batch at this time."`
- Application logs contain connection errors to Redis (e.g., `ConnectionError`, `TimeoutError`).

### Diagnostics
1. **Check worker availability**
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker inspect ping
   ```
   All registered workers should respond with `pong`.
2. **Inspect active tasks**
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect active
   ```
   Confirm whether tasks are stuck or if queues are empty.
3. **Validate Redis connectivity**
   ```bash
   redis-cli -h <redis-host> -p <redis-port> ping
   ```
   A healthy Redis instance responds with `PONG`.
4. Review Celery worker logs (`logs/celery-worker.log` if using the provided Docker
   setup) for traceback information.

### Recovery Steps
1. Restart Redis and Celery workers:
   ```bash
   docker compose restart redis celery
   ```
   or, if running locally:
   ```bash
   systemctl restart redis
   pkill -f "celery worker"
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker -l info
   ```
2. After services are healthy, requeue affected batches using their `task_id`s (see
   [Handling failed batch API tasks](#handling-failed-batch-api-tasks)).
3. Consider scaling worker concurrency temporarily if there is a backlog:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker -l info --concurrency=4
   ```

> ℹ️ When monitoring integrations are available, link automated alerts for Celery
> queue depth, worker heartbeats, and Redis availability here.

## Batch Attendance API Failures

### Symptoms
- HTTP 4xx or 5xx responses from `POST /recognition/enqueue-attendance-batch/`.
- Clients observe rate limiting with HTTP 429 responses.
- API responses contain error details such as `"'records' must be a list."` or `"Record at index 2 must be a JSON object."`

### Diagnostics
1. **Validate payload format**: Ensure the request body is UTF-8 encoded JSON with a
   top-level `records` list.
2. **Check server logs** for JSON parsing or validation errors logged by
   `recognition.views.enqueue_attendance_batch`.
3. **Inspect the Celery task** associated with a submission:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect query_task <task-id>
   ```
4. **Rate limiting (HTTP 429)**
   - Confirm the caller is not exceeding the configured limit in
     `settings.RECOGNITION_ATTENDANCE_RATE_LIMIT`.
   - Use server access logs to correlate frequent requests from the same user or IP.

### Recovery Steps
1. For malformed payloads, correct the data and retry the request.
2. If Redis/Celery were previously unavailable, follow the outage recovery steps and
   resubmit the batch.
3. When encountering HTTP 429:
   - Back off and retry after the window specified by the rate limit (default `5/m`).
   - Coordinate with the operations team to adjust the limit if legitimate bursts are required.
4. For HTTP 503 responses, verify worker availability and retry once the queue is
   healthy.

> ℹ️ Add references to API request rate dashboards or alert policies when available.

## Fallback Behaviours in `recognition/views.py`

Certain failure scenarios trigger graceful fallbacks in the recognition pipeline.
Understanding them helps interpret API responses and user-facing behaviour.

### Empty Embedding Dataset (HTTP 503)
If no enrolled embeddings are available, `_load_dataset_embeddings_for_matching`
returns an empty index, and the recognition API responds with HTTP 503 and
`"No enrolled face embeddings are available for comparison."`

**Action**
1. Confirm the dataset directory (`face_recognition_data/training_dataset/`) contains
   user subdirectories with captured images.
2. Run the dataset embedding refresh job or trigger attendance enrolment to rebuild
   embeddings.

### Liveness Check Failures
When `_passes_liveness_check` fails, the API still returns a JSON payload but sets
`"spoofed": true` and leaves `"recognized": false`.

**Action**
1. Advise the user to retry with better lighting and camera positioning.
2. Review liveness heuristics if false positives occur frequently.

### Distance Metric Fallbacks
`_calculate_embedding_distance` attempts cosine, Euclidean, or Manhattan metrics. If
all fail, it logs `"Failed to compute fallback distance"` and skips the candidate.

**Action**
1. Inspect embeddings for corruption or unexpected data types.
2. Recompute embeddings for affected users using the dataset creation workflow.

> ℹ️ Plan to link to recognition service health dashboards (model accuracy,
> liveness failure rate) once monitoring is deployed.

## Handling Failed Batch API Tasks

1. Locate the `task_id` from the batch submission response (`202 Accepted`).
2. Query task status:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect query_task <task-id>
   ```
   or, if result backend is enabled:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition result <task-id>
   ```
3. If the task failed, review the Celery result for traceback details and requeue the
   normalized records:
   ```bash
   python manage.py shell <<'PY'
   from recognition.tasks import process_attendance_batch
   records = [...]  # original normalized payload
   process_attendance_batch.delay(records)
   PY
   ```
4. For persistent failures, verify dependent services (database, filesystem access,
   face recognition models) and consult Celery worker logs for stack traces.

> ℹ️ Document alert integrations for task failure rates or retry exhaustion when
> those tools are in place.

Commit message:

Offload recognition workflows to Celery

docs/troubleshooting.md, after:

# Operations Troubleshooting Guide

This guide provides actionable steps for diagnosing and resolving operational issues
encountered while running the Attendance Management System. It focuses on the
asynchronous attendance pipeline (Celery + Redis), the batch attendance API, and
fallback behaviours implemented in `recognition/views.py`.

## Celery or Redis Outage

### Symptoms
- Batch attendance submissions remain in a `PENDING` state or never complete.
- `enqueue_attendance_batch` API returns HTTP 503 with the message `"Unable to enqueue attendance batch at this time."`
- Application logs contain connection errors to Redis (e.g., `ConnectionError`, `TimeoutError`).

### Diagnostics
1. **Check worker availability**
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker inspect ping
   ```
   All registered workers should respond with `pong`.
2. **Inspect active tasks**
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect active
   ```
   Confirm whether tasks are stuck or if queues are empty.
3. **Validate Redis connectivity**
   ```bash
   redis-cli -h <redis-host> -p <redis-port> ping
   ```
   A healthy Redis instance responds with `PONG`.
4. Review Celery worker logs (`logs/celery-worker.log` if using the provided Docker
   setup) for traceback information.

### Recovery Steps
1. Restart Redis and Celery workers:
   ```bash
   docker compose restart redis celery
   ```
   or, if running locally:
   ```bash
   systemctl restart redis
   pkill -f "celery worker"
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker -l info
   ```
2. After services are healthy, requeue affected batches using their `task_id`s (see
   [Handling failed batch API tasks](#handling-failed-batch-api-tasks)).
3. Consider scaling worker concurrency temporarily if there is a backlog:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition worker -l info --concurrency=4
   ```

> ℹ️ When monitoring integrations are available, link automated alerts for Celery
> queue depth, worker heartbeats, and Redis availability here.

## Batch Attendance API Failures

### Symptoms
- HTTP 4xx or 5xx responses from `POST /recognition/enqueue-attendance-batch/`.
- Clients observe rate limiting with HTTP 429 responses.
- API responses contain error details such as `"'records' must be a list."` or `"Record at index 2 must be a JSON object."`

### Diagnostics
1. **Validate payload format**: Ensure the request body is UTF-8 encoded JSON with a
   top-level `records` list.
2. **Check server logs** for JSON parsing or validation errors logged by
   `recognition.views.enqueue_attendance_batch`.
3. **Inspect the Celery task** associated with a submission:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect query_task <task-id>
   ```
4. **Rate limiting (HTTP 429)**
   - Confirm the caller is not exceeding the configured limit in
     `settings.RECOGNITION_ATTENDANCE_RATE_LIMIT`.
   - Use server access logs to correlate frequent requests from the same user or IP.

### Recovery Steps
1. For malformed payloads, correct the data and retry the request.
2. If Redis/Celery were previously unavailable, follow the outage recovery steps and
   resubmit the batch.
3. When encountering HTTP 429:
   - Back off and retry after the window specified by the rate limit (default `5/m`).
   - Coordinate with the operations team to adjust the limit if legitimate bursts are required.
4. For HTTP 503 responses, verify worker availability and retry once the queue is
   healthy.

> ℹ️ Add references to API request rate dashboards or alert policies when available.

## Fallback Behaviours in `recognition/views.py`

Certain failure scenarios trigger graceful fallbacks in the recognition pipeline.
Understanding them helps interpret API responses and user-facing behaviour.

### Empty Embedding Dataset (HTTP 503)
If no enrolled embeddings are available, `_load_dataset_embeddings_for_matching`
returns an empty index, and the recognition API responds with HTTP 503 and
`"No enrolled face embeddings are available for comparison."`

**Action**
1. Confirm the dataset directory (`face_recognition_data/training_dataset/`) contains
   user subdirectories with captured images.
2. Queue the `capture_dataset` Celery task (via **Add Photos** or `tasks.capture_dataset.delay`) to rebuild
   encrypted samples. Monitor progress through `/tasks/<task-id>/`.

### Liveness Check Failures
When `_passes_liveness_check` fails, the API still returns a JSON payload but sets
`"spoofed": true` and leaves `"recognized": false`.

**Action**
1. Advise the user to retry with better lighting and camera positioning.
2. Review liveness heuristics if false positives occur frequently.

### Distance Metric Fallbacks
`_calculate_embedding_distance` attempts cosine, Euclidean, or Manhattan metrics. If
all fail, it logs `"Failed to compute fallback distance"` and skips the candidate.

**Action**
1. Inspect embeddings for corruption or unexpected data types.
2. Recompute embeddings by re-running the capture workflow and verifying the corresponding Celery job succeeds.

> ℹ️ Plan to link to recognition service health dashboards (model accuracy,
> liveness failure rate) once monitoring is deployed.

## Handling Failed Batch API Tasks

1. Locate the `task_id` from the batch submission response (`202 Accepted`).
2. Query task status:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition inspect query_task <task-id>
   ```
   or, if result backend is enabled:
   ```bash
   celery -A attendance_system_facial_recognition result <task-id>
   ```
3. If the task failed, review the Celery result for traceback details and requeue the
   normalized records:
   ```bash
   python manage.py shell <<'PY'
   from recognition.tasks import process_attendance_batch
   records = [...]  # original normalized payload
   process_attendance_batch.delay(records)
   PY
   ```
4. For persistent failures, verify dependent services (database, filesystem access,
   face recognition models) and consult Celery worker logs for stack traces.

> ℹ️ Document alert integrations for task failure rates or retry exhaustion when
> those tools are in place.
